#LyX 2.3 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 544
\begin_document
\begin_header
\save_transient_properties true
\origin unavailable
\textclass scrbook
\begin_preamble
% DO NOT ALTER THIS PREAMBLE!!!
%
% This preamble is designed to ensure that the manual prints
% out as advertised. If you mess with this preamble,
% parts of the manual may not print out as expected.  If you
% have problems LaTeXing this file, please contact 
% the documentation team
% email: lyx-docs@lists.lyx.org

% the pages of the TOC are numbered roman
% and a PDF-bookmark for the TOC is added

\pagenumbering{roman}
\let\myTOC\tableofcontents
\renewcommand{\tableofcontents}{%
 \pdfbookmark[1]{\contentsname}{}
 \myTOC

 \pagenumbering{arabic}}

% extra space for tables
\newcommand{\extratablespace}[1]{\noalign{\vskip#1}}
\makeatletter
\g@addto@macro{\UrlBreaks}{\UrlOrds}
\makeatother
\end_preamble
\options bibliography=totoc,index=totoc,BCOR7.5mm,titlepage,captions=tableheading
\use_default_options false
\begin_modules
logicalmkup
theorems-ams
theorems-ams-extended
multicol
shapepar
\end_modules
\maintain_unincluded_children false
\language english
\language_package default
\inputencoding auto
\fontencoding global
\font_roman "lmodern" "default"
\font_sans "lmss" "default"
\font_typewriter "lmtt" "default"
\font_math "auto" "auto"
\font_default_family default
\use_non_tex_fonts false
\font_sc false
\font_osf false
\font_sf_scale 100 100
\font_tt_scale 100 100
\use_microtype false
\use_dash_ligatures true
\graphics default
\default_output_format default
\output_sync 0
\bibtex_command default
\index_command default
\float_placement h
\paperfontsize 12
\spacing single
\use_hyperref true
\pdf_title "Machine Learning Notes"
\pdf_author "Ladislav Sulak"
\pdf_bookmarks true
\pdf_bookmarksnumbered true
\pdf_bookmarksopen false
\pdf_bookmarksopenlevel 1
\pdf_breaklinks false
\pdf_pdfborder false
\pdf_colorlinks true
\pdf_backref false
\pdf_pdfusetitle false
\pdf_quoted_options "linkcolor=black, citecolor=black, urlcolor=blue, filecolor=blue, pdfpagelayout=OneColumn, pdfnewwindow=true, pdfstartview=XYZ, plainpages=false"
\papersize a4paper
\use_geometry true
\use_package amsmath 1
\use_package amssymb 1
\use_package cancel 1
\use_package esint 1
\use_package mathdots 1
\use_package mathtools 1
\use_package mhchem 1
\use_package stackrel 1
\use_package stmaryrd 1
\use_package undertilde 1
\cite_engine natbib
\cite_engine_type authoryear
\biblio_style plainnat
\use_bibtopic false
\use_indices false
\paperorientation portrait
\suppress_date false
\justification true
\use_refstyle 0
\use_minted 0
\notefontcolor #0000ff
\index Index
\shortcut idx
\color #008000
\end_index
\secnumdepth 1
\tocdepth 1
\paragraph_separation indent
\paragraph_indentation default
\is_math_indent 1
\math_indentation default
\math_numbering_side default
\quotes_style english
\dynamic_quotes 0
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle headings
\tracking_changes false
\output_changes false
\html_math_output 0
\html_css_as_file 0
\html_be_strict true
\end_header

\begin_body

\begin_layout Chapter
Alternative Investments
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
We briefly mentioned alternative investments in Chapter 
\begin_inset CommandInset ref
LatexCommand ref
reference "chap:Investing-Strategies"
plural "false"
caps "false"
noprefix "false"

\end_inset

.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection
Buffett On Investment Alternatives
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Wall Street tends to embrace ideas based on revenue-generating power, rather
 than on financial sense, a tendency that often perverts good ideas to bad
 ones.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
About financial crisis of 2008 - contemporary financial engineering has
 produced an explosion of complex instruments known as derivatives, because
 their fluctuating value is derived from movements in a contractually designated
 benchmark.
 Proponents believe that these devices are useful to manage risk - and Berkshire
 from time to time takes modest positions in derivatives contracts that
 Buffett judges as mispriced.
 But while proponents also believe that derivatives tend to reduce the overall
 systemic risk, Buffett presciently observed that they may have the opposite
 effect.
 They are hard to value, valuations can change rapidly and they create linkages
 and inter-dependencies among financial institutions.
 Buffett cautioned that the combination of these factors could mean that,
 should a single event cause challenges in one sector, that could spread
 rapidly to others with a domino effect bringing devastating systemic consequenc
es.
 Such was the case with the crisis of 2008.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Junk Bonds
\end_layout

\begin_deeper
\begin_layout Itemize
Investing in junk bonds and investing in stocks are alike in certain ways
 - both activities require us to make a price-value calculation and also
 to scan hundreds of securities to find the very few that have attractive
 reward/risk ratios.
 But there are important differences between the two disciplines as well.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
In stocks, we expect every commitment to work out well because we concentrate
 on conservatively financed businesses with strong competitive strengths,
 run by able and honest people.
 If we buy into these companies at sensible prices, losses should be rare.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Purchasing junk bonds, we are dealing with enterprises that are far more
 marginal.
 These businesses are usually overloaded with debt and often operate in
 industries characterized by low returns on capital.
 Additionally, the quality of management is sometimes questionable.
 Management may even have interests that are directly counter to those of
 debt-holders.
 Therefore, Buffett expects that they will have occasional large losses
 in junk issues.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Berkshire has bought, in the past, a few below-investment-grade bonds with
 success, though these were all old-fashioned "fallen angels" - bonds that
 were initially of investment grade but that were downgraded when the issuers
 fell on bad times.
\end_layout

\end_deeper
\begin_layout Itemize
Zero-Coupon Bonds
\end_layout

\begin_deeper
\begin_layout Itemize
Most bonds, of course, require regular payments of interest, usually semi-annual
ly.
 A zero-coupon bond, conversely, requires no current interest payments;
 instead, the investor receives his yield by purchasing the security at
 a significant discount from maturity value.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
The effective interest rate is determined by the original issue price, the
 maturity value, and the amount of time between issuance and maturity.
 
\end_layout

\end_deeper
\begin_layout Itemize
Preferred Stock
\end_layout

\begin_deeper
\begin_layout Itemize
Preference shares, more commonly referred to as preferred stock, are shares
 of a company's stock with dividends that are paid out to shareholders before
 common stock dividends are issued.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
If the company enters bankruptcy, preferred stockholders are entitled to
 be paid from company assets before common stockholders.
\end_layout

\end_deeper
\begin_layout Itemize
Derivatives
\end_layout

\begin_deeper
\begin_layout Itemize
Munger and Buffett view derivatives as time bombs, both for the parties
 that deal in them and the economic system.
 Essentially, these instruments call for money to change hands at some future
 date, with the amount to be determined by one or more reference items,
 such as interest rates, stock prices or currency values.
 Derivatives contracts are of varying duration (running sometimes to 20
 or more years) and their value is often tied to several variables.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
The range of derivatives contracts is limited only by the imagination of
 man (or sometimes, so it seems, madmen).
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
But closing down a derivatives business is easier said than done.
 In fact, the reinsurance and derivatives business are similar: like hell,
 both are easy to enter and almost impossible to exit.
 In either industry, once you write a contract - which may require a large
 payment decades later - you are usually stuck with it.
 True, there are methods by which the risk can be laid off with others.
 But most strategies of that kind leave you with residual liability.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Another commonality of reinsurance and derivatives is that both generate
 reported earnings that are often wildly overstated.
 That's true because today's earnings are in a significant way based on
 estimates whose inaccuracy may not be exposed for many years.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
As a general rule, contracts involving multiple reference items and distant
 settlement dates increase the opportunities for counter-parties to use
 fanciful assumptions.
 Of course, both internal and outside auditors review the numbers, but that's
 no easy job.
 Earnings can be manipulated so that they are in favor of either the trader
 who was eyeing a multi-million dollar bonus or the CEO who wanted to report
 impressive "earnings" (or both).
 The bonuses were paid, and the CEO profited from his options.
 Only much later did shareholders learn that the reported earnings were
 a sham.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Another problem about derivatives is that they can exacerbate trouble that
 a corporation has run into for completely unrelated reasons.
 This pile-on effect occurs because many derivatives contracts require that
 a company suffering a credit downgrade immediately supply collateral to
 counter-parties.
 Imagine, then, that a company is downgraded because of general adversity
 and that its derivatives instantly kick in with their requirement, imposing
 an unexpected and enormous demand for cash collateral on the company.
 The need to meet this demand can then throw the company into a liquidity
 crisis that may, in some cases, trigger still more downgrades.
 It all becomes a spiral that can lead to a corporate meltdown.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Derivatives also create a daisy-chain risk that is akin to the risk run
 by insurers or reinsurers that lay off much of their business with others.
 In both cases, huge receivables from many counter-parties tend to build
 up over time.
 A participant may see himself as prudent, believing his large credit exposures
 to be diversified and therefore not dangerous.
 Under certain circumstances, though, an exogenous event that causes the
 receivable from Company A to go bad will also affect those from Companies
 B through Z.
 History teaches us that a crisis often causes problems to correlate in
 a manner undreamed of in more tranquil times.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
In banking, the recognition of a "linkage" problem was one of the reasons
 for the formation of the Federal Reserve System.
 Before the Fed was established, the failure of weak banks would sometimes
 put sudden and unanticipated liquidity demands on previously strong banks,
 causing them to fail in turn.
 The Fed now insulates the strong from the troubles of the weak.
 But there is no central bank assigned to the job of preventing the dominoes
 toppling in insurance or derivatives.
 In these industries, firms that are fundamentally solid can become troubled
 simply because of the travails of other firms further down the chain.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Many people argue that derivatives reduce systemic problems, in that participant
s who can't bear certain risk are able to transfer them to stronger hands.
 These people believe that derivatives act to stabilize the economy, facilitate
 trade, and eliminate bumps for individual participants.
 And, on a micro level, what they say is often true.
 Indeed, at Berkshire, Buffett sometimes engages in large-scale derivatives
 transaction in order to facilitate certain investment strategies.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
However, Munger and Buffett believe that the macro picture is dangerous
 and getting more so.
 Large amounts of risk, particularly credit risk, have become concentrated
 in the hands of relatively few derivatives dealers, who in addition trade
 extensively with one other.
 The troubles of one could quickly infect the others.
 On top of that, these dealers are owed huge amounts by non-dealer counter-parti
es.
 Some of these counter-parties are linked in ways that could cause them
 to contemporaneously run into a problem because of a single event.
 Linkage, when it suddenly surfaces, can trigger serious systemic problems.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Even experienced investors and analysts encounter major problems in analyzing
 the financial condition of firms that are heavily involved with derivative
 contracts.
 When Munger and Buffett finish reading the long footnotes detailing the
 derivatives activities of major banks, the only thing they understand is
 that they don't understand how much risk the institution is running.
 Central banks and governments have so far found no effective way to control,
 or even monitor, the risks posed by these contracts.
 In Buffett and Munger's view, derivatives are financial weapons of mass
 destruction, carrying dangers that, while now latent, are potentially lethal.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Long contracts, or alternatively those with multiple variables, are the
 most difficult to mark to market (the standard procedure used in accounting
 for derivatives) and provide the most opportunity for "imagination" when
 traders are estimating their value.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Berkshire occasionally enters into various types of derivatives contracts.
 That may seem odd given the systemic problems that could result from the
 enormous growth in the use of derivatives.
 However, derivatives, just like stocks and bonds, are sometimes wildly
 mispriced.
 For many years, accordingly, Berkshire has selectively written derivative
 contracts - few in number but sometimes for large dollar amounts.
 Buffett personally manages them.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Buffett: "I know of no reporting mechanism that would come close to describing
 and measuring the risks in a huge and complex portfolio of derivatives.
 Auditors can't audit these contracts, and regulators can't regulate them.
 When I read the pages of disclosure in 10-Ks of companies that are entangled
 with these instruments, all I end up knowing is that I don't know what
 is going on in their portfolios (and then I reach for some aspirin)."
\end_layout

\end_deeper
\begin_layout Itemize
Foreign Currencies and Equities
\end_layout

\begin_deeper
\begin_layout Itemize
Berkshire holds many billions of cash-equivalents (2003) denominated in
 dollars.
 Buffett feels more comfortable owning foreign-exchange contracts that are
 at least a partial offset to that position.
 He is a bit worried about USA's trade deficit, but he'll continue to be
 flooded with dollars.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
"Large and persisting current account deficits produce an entirely different
 result.
 As time passes, and as claims against us grow, we own less and less of
 what we produce.
 In effect, the rest of the world enjoys an ever-growing royalty on American
 output.
 Here, we are like a family that consistently overspends its income.
 As time passes, the family finds that it is working more and more for the
 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

finance company
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 and less for itself.
 In 2004, other countries and their citizens now own a net of about $3 trillion
 of the U.S.
 A decade ago their net ownership was negligible."
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Buffett is very concerned about the US trade problems.
 He thinks that the probability that the dollar will weaken over time continues
 to be high.
 The U.S.
 is transferring ownership of its sales or IOUs to the rest of the world.
 Like a very wealthy but self-indulgent family, we peeled off a bit of what
 we owned in order to consume more than we produced.
 Buffett thinks that Americans will live better 10 or 20 years from now
 than they do today (2006).
 Per-capital wealth will increase.
 But US citizens will also be forced every year to ship a significant portion
 of their current production abroad merely to service the cost of US huge
 debtor position.
 It won't be pleasant to work part of each day to pay for the over-consumption
 of US ancestors.
 Buffett believes that at some point in the future U.S.
 workers and voters will find this annual 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

tribute
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 so onerous that there will be a severe political backlash.
 How that will play out in markets is impossible to predict - but to expect
 a 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

soft landing
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 seems like a wishful thinking.
\end_layout

\end_deeper
\begin_layout Section
Private Equity
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection
Venture Capital
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection
Growth Capital
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection
Buyouts / LBO
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
Crypto
\end_layout

\begin_layout Paragraph
Cryptocurrency Stable Coins
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Fiat-Collateralized (secure to crashes, not decentralized)
\end_layout

\begin_deeper
\begin_layout Itemize
Tether (USDT) - 1:1 backed by USD.
 backed by Bitfinex, centrally controlled, most major exchanges
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
TrueUSD - 1:1 backed by USD.
 backed by Bitfinex, not decentralized, most major exchanges
\end_layout

\end_deeper
\begin_layout Itemize
Crypto-Collateralized based (not secure to crashes - it's super volatile,
 decentralized)
\end_layout

\begin_deeper
\begin_layout Itemize
MakerDao (MKR) - uses ETH to stabilize prices, 1:1.5 collateralized USD value,
 decentralized, most smaller exchanges
\end_layout

\end_deeper
\begin_layout Itemize
Non-Collateralized (not secure to crashes, decentralized)
\end_layout

\begin_deeper
\begin_layout Itemize
Basis (formerly BaseCoin) - Pegged to USD +2 other tokens, works like fed
 reserve, only theoretical so far, not decentralized, no exchanges yet
\end_layout

\end_deeper
\begin_layout Section
Gold
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
There are many options on how to invest in gold:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Physical gold
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Physical gold ETFs
\end_layout

\begin_deeper
\begin_layout Itemize
Physical gold ETFs can be a bad idea...it depends if you are focused on price
 (ETF) vs value (gold).
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Gold ETFs can be backed by banks, you can never see "your" physical gold,
 price can be reflected in ETF popularity, ...
 they store gold in vaults and charge you a expense rate about 0.4% usually.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Examples: GLD, IAU, SGOL
\end_layout

\end_deeper
\begin_layout Itemize
Gold miners
\end_layout

\begin_deeper
\begin_layout Itemize
Gold miners can be a tenbagger! or hundredbagger! very volatile, silver
 miners are much much bigger speculation, but it can be worth to have a
 look on them as well.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Gold stock analysis example 
\begin_inset CommandInset href
LatexCommand href
name "here"
target "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tjvdpzTc0cU&list=WL&index=1"
literal "false"

\end_inset

 and analysis tips 
\begin_inset CommandInset href
LatexCommand href
name "here"
target "https://www.ii.co.uk/analysis-commentary/mining-stocks-tips-2020-ii510189"
literal "false"

\end_inset

.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Every gold miner is different; you are looking for low risk and high potential
 reward, especially if gold prices change as a hedge against new monetary
 policies.
 You can get more value (risk+reward) than a gold ETF offers.
 And miners actually produce something, plus they can be much more leveraged.
 In the gold mining industry, the management is the biggest risk.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Examples: Barrick, Franco Nevada, Novagold Goldcorp (GG), Newcrest Mining,
 Kirkland Lake Gold (KL), WA Gold Royalty, AngloGold Ashanti, Newmont, EGO,
 Gold Fields, NYSE: SBGL
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
An example, cost to mine - $1200, gold price $1250, profit = $50.
\end_layout

\begin_deeper
\begin_layout Standard
If the gold price goes to $2500, profit (before taxes and royalties etc)
 = $1300, which is profit up 26x! Stock up 10-20x!
\end_layout

\end_deeper
\begin_layout Itemize
Check cash flows, reserves and potential production, leverage/costs, and
 react to special situations.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Gold miners have a big margin expansion and thus also volatility.
 Because if the mining costs would remain the same, and the price of gold
 is 1000 USD/ounce vs 2000 USD/ounce, then the margin would explode.
 The same is true in the opposite direction, when gold is cheaper.
 For example, mining costs = $1000 and the gold price is $1200, then the
 margin is $200.
 If the price of gold is $2000, then with the same mining costs, the margin
 would be $600, which is a three times more than it was previously - and
 the price of gold haven't even doubled.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Key factors:
\end_layout

\begin_deeper
\begin_layout Itemize
Life of mine - for how long can keep up the current production?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Mining costs and margin - the higher the mining costs the higher will be
 the stock volatility.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Jurisdiction - mining is a global business and every country has its own
 rules where rules often change.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Growth perspectives - with higher gold prices, many projects suddenly become
 valuable.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Cash flows - operating cash flows, capex and free cash flows - what can
 it deliver to shareholders?
\end_layout

\end_deeper
\begin_layout Itemize
Before investing in gold or a gold mining stock, it is important to check
 where the gold price is from a risk and reward perspective, where are the
 miner's margins in relation to gold and how could changes in the market
 affect gold prices and gold stock prices.
 This approach gives you the answer when considering how can gold and gold
 stocks fit your portfolio.
\end_layout

\end_deeper
\begin_layout Itemize
Gold miners ETFs
\end_layout

\begin_deeper
\begin_layout Itemize
Examples: VANECK
\end_layout

\end_deeper
\begin_layout Section
Collectibles
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Examples: rare cars, rare wines, whiskey, rum, trading cards, watches.
 (sparsity of resources and supply & demand)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
Commodities
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Real assets, gas, oil, etc - it can be an inflation hedge.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
Real Estate
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
I have an entire book on real estate investing in this notes collection
 check my GitHub 
\begin_inset CommandInset href
LatexCommand href
name "here"
target "https://github.com/lsulak/lessons-learned-notes"
literal "false"

\end_inset

.
\end_layout

\end_body
\end_document
